# Breakout Trading Strategy: A Guide for Traders
URL: https://www.ig.com/en/trading-strategies/what-is-a-breakout-trading-strategy-and-how-do-you-trade-with-it-230619
다운로드 날짜: 2026-01-04 10:24:24

---

Skip to content
CFDs are complex instruments. 71% of retail client accounts lose money when trading CFDs, with this investment provider. You can lose your money rapidly due to leverage. Please ensure you understand how this product works and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing money.
CFDs are complex instruments. 71% of retail client accounts lose money when trading CFDs, with this investment provider. You can lose your money rapidly due to leverage. Please ensure you understand how this product works and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing money.
More from IG
Personal
Academy
Help
Inbox
Academy
Help
English
繁體中文
Español
简体中文
English
Log in
Create live account
My account
My IG
Inbox
Academy
Help
Personal
Logout
Open
Trading
Show submenu for Trading
Main menu
TRADING
How to trade
CFD trading
What to trade
Forex
Indices
Shares
Commodities
Cryptocurrencies
Thematic and basket
Other markets
Discover more
Create an account
Out-of-hours trading
Weekend trading
Volatility trading
Knock-Outs trading
Options trading
Futures trading
Spot trading
Market data
Interest rates
Try the IG platform now
Set up a FREE demo account
Platforms and tools
Show submenu for Platforms and tools
Main menu
PLATFORMS AND TOOLS
Mobile trading
Compare platforms
Explore on demo
Third party platforms
L2 Dealer
ProRealTime
MetaTrader 4
MetaTrader 5
TradingView
Tools
Stock screener
Economic and trading calendar
Trade analytics tool
Trading alerts
Trading charts
Trading signals
Forex Signals
Discover more
Explore on demo
DMA trading
Algorithmic trading
APIs
Trade on the go, anytime, anywhere.
Download our app
About us
Show submenu for About us
Main menu
ABOUT US
Our charges
Welcome Cashback
Volume-based rebates
Reduced minimums
Our services
Premium services
Corporate accounts
Refer a friend
Marketing partnership programmes
Introducing Partners
Discover more
What we do with your money
How does IG make money?
How we support you
Best execution
Get up to a $150 cashback
Open a live account
Market analysis
Show submenu for Market analysis
Main menu
MARKET ANALYSIS
Latest analysis
Financial events
Discover more
Economic and trading calendar
Tools
Stock screener
Stay ahead with expert insights
Latest updates on the markets
Learning
Show submenu for Learning
Main menu
LEARNING
IG Academy
Strategy and planning
Managing your risk
Risk vs reward in trading
What is leverage?
The impact of leverage on your trading
What are stop orders?
What are limit orders?
Trading need-to-knows
What is trading?
Trading for beginners: a guide
Start trading: how to get into trading
How to choose the best online broker
How to start trading online
What are derivatives?
What is a brokerage account?
How to choose the best forex broker
What is margin trading?
How to find the best day trading platform
How to trade stocks online
Ways to learn
Seminars and webinars
Glossary of trading terms
Maximising trading success
Master your trading mind
Trading psychology podcast series
Discover more
Explore on demo
Help and support
Master the markets with IG Academy
Start learning
Personal
Inbox
Academy
Help
Create live account
English
繁體中文
Español
简体中文
English
Create live account
Search
No results found
View more search results
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Related search:
Market Data
Market Data
Type of market
See all Market data search results >
Strategy and planning
What is a breakout trading strategy and how do you trade with it?
What is a breakout trading strategy and how do you trade with it?
The breakout trading strategy is a popular tactic to potentially generate returns by analysing breakouts grounded on chart-based support and resistance levels. Read our guide below.
Source: Bloomberg
Written by
Charles Archer
Financial Writer
What's on this page?
1. What is a breakout strategy in trading?
2. How do breakouts work?
3. Types of breakout strategies
4. How to trade using breakouts
5. Pros and cons of the breakout trading strategy
What is a breakout strategy in trading?
A breakout is when an asset price moves outside a defined support or resistance level with increased volume.
Following this, a breakout strategy is a popular
trading approach
used by active traders to take a position within this trend's early stages. This strategy is often the starting point for large price moves and increased volatility – when managed carefully, it can even help in managing risk more efficiently.
A breakout trade involves entering a long position after the asset price breaks above a
resistance level
, or a short position if it breaks below the
support level
. Once the asset trades beyond the perceived 'price barrier', volatility tends to increase and then the asset’s price usually trends in the breakout's direction.
Traders are always looking for strong momentum, and the actual breakout can be a sign to enter a position and hopefully profit from the market movement.
Breakouts are common in most markets. This pervasiveness is a key reason for the strategy's popularity. Large price movements are typical within channel breakouts and price pattern breakouts, such as the well-known head-and-shoulders, triangle, and flags patterns.¹
Further, it can be a solid trading tactic. Whether you’re a position trader or you prefer to skim potential profits off several daily trades, the concept tends to work well if the market moves in your favour, regardless of your timeframe.
Of course, there are a couple of caveats to be aware of:
Traders using breakouts usually place 'take-profit' and 'stop-loss' orders to manage their risk
Like all trading strategies, there’s no guarantee of returns. Just because a strategy is popular doesn’t necessarily mean that your trade will be successful
How do breakouts work?
A breakout occurs when the price of an asset moves below a support level or above a resistance level. It indicates that the asset price will move further in the breakout direction – but importantly, a breakout requires higher than normal volume to sustain itself. This signifies increased interest and conviction in market sentiment.
Low-volume breakout patterns are prone to failure, meaning the asset price is more likely to retrace.
Breakouts can be a subjective trading term, as traders often disagree about what exactly constitutes the support and resistance levels.
What is a support level?
When using technical analysis to support your trading decisions, looking at a chart over an extended period will likely show some support levels – areas where prices are usually supported. These support levels provide a 'floor' for asset prices – whenever an asset falls to the support level, there’s a wall of willing buyers to purchase because they think the price presents good relative value.
What is a resistance level?
A resistance level is essentially the opposite of a support level. On a chart, you can often find resistance levels as areas where prices usually stop (or are resisted) and don't go any higher.
There’s an element of 'positive feedback' when it comes to support and resistance. To manage their risk, many traders will have stop and limit orders in place at the support and resistance levels, depending on the direction of their position. This means that both levels could remain in place for some time.
Types of breakout strategies
Breakout trading strategies have some tenets in common:
Identifying your opportunity – find assets (eg stocks, forex or commodities) with strong support and/or resistance levels. The stronger the support or resistance, the better the potential for a favourable result
Waiting for the breakout – most strategies require patience, and breakouts are no exception. To avoid a false breakout, you can wait for the asset price to make a sizeable move before taking your position
Setting a profit target – you can plan when to take potential profits before you place your trade. Traders often use stop-loss and take-profit orders to manage the risk of possible losses and to lock in potential profits
Allowing the asset to retest a level – when an asset breaks a support level, the old support often becomes the new resistance. When it breaks its resistance level, the old resistance level often becomes the new support. Some trades will see the asset retest the broken level fairly quickly – if it breaks back through it, many traders typically consider accepting the loss
Continuation breakout strategy
The continuation breakout strategy is an approach that aims to enter the market when there’s a breakout of a key level of support or resistance. The basic idea is that the established trend will continue – this breakout trade seeks to capitalise on the momentum.
Traders start by identifying a trend, then look for a 'consolidation' phase – the strategy starts delivering returns when the price breaks out of consolidation and moves beyond the key level of support or resistance. This is when the trade is usually placed, with the profit target set by measuring the height of the consolidation phase and projecting it in the direction of the breakout.
2
Reversal breakout strategy
While the continuation breakout strategy aims to capitalise on a trend's momentum, the reversal breakout strategy aims to profit from an expected trend reversal. The same theories that apply to the continuation breakout strategy remain relevant, as do the general tenets.
How to trade using breakouts with CFDs
How to invest in breakouts with us
Create an account
or
log in
Learn more about breakouts
Search for your opportunity
Select 'buy' to go long or 'sell' to go short
Set your position size and
manage your risk
Open and monitor your position
With us, you’ll trade using a
contract for difference (CFD)
, a financial derivative that enables you to take a position on an underlying market’s price movements, rather than owning the underlying asset outright.
CFD trading is
leveraged
, so you could gain or lose money quickly – including the potential to lose more than the initial deposit paid to open the position, as potential profits and losses are magnified to the full value of the trade. It's useful to keep in mind that past performance isn't a guarantee of future patterns.
New to trading? Practise on a
demo account
to build your confidence.
Pros and cons of the breakout trading strategy
As with all strategies, trading breakouts comes with its own unique set of advantages and risks.
Pros of the breakout trading strategy
Profit potential – breakout trading can be profitable because an asset's price can move rapidly when it goes past the breakout³
Objective entry and exit points – the strategy takes the emotion out of the trade because there are very clear points to time your trade, both for profit-taking and accepting a loss
Multi-market usability – breakout trading applies to many markets, including equities, commodities and forex
Time-friendly – traders can set their
take-profit and stop-loss orders
after they’ve conducted their analysis, then leave their position without having to worry about adjustments
Potential to manage risk more efficiently – through analysing price patterns and using toul such as stop-loss orders accordingly, risk can be managed based on support and resistance level theories to mitigate possible losses
Cons of the breakout trading strategy
Rapid pace – traders must usually be able to make rapid decisions as the market moves. This pressure isn’t for everyone
Patience – the breakout trading strategy requires traders to be capable of waiting for the breakout and then confirming the direction of the trend. It’s also possible that you spend time analysing opportunities that don’t lead to a trade
False breakouts – so-called 'fake-outs' can occur, where the asset price breaks out of the consolidation phase but then quickly reverses, which results in a loss when trading a breakout and you don’t take a profit before the reversal. You can minimise the chances of this happening by checking additional confirmation signals, but this also increases the risk of missing the opportunity altogether⁴
Volatility – breakout trading typically occurs in highly volatile markets, which means that you can do everything right based on market conditions and strategy theory and still suffer a loss. Ultimately, no strategy is foolproof
Trading costs – the strategy often involves many small trades, which increases platform fees and bites into potential returns over time
Breakout trading strategy summed up
A breakout is when an asset price moves outside a defined support or resistance level with increased volume
The breakout strategy is a popular trading approach used by active traders to take a position within this trend's early stages
A breakout trader will enter a long position after the asset price breaks above a resistance level, or enter a short position if it breaks below support
Breakout trading can be profitable as an asset's price can move rapidly when it goes past the breakout
The price movement can turn out being a false breakout, where the asset price breaks out of the consolidation phase but then quickly reverses, resulting in a loss
1
Babypips
, 2023
2
Trading with Rayner
, 2022
3
Axi
, 2023
4
Warrior Trading
, 2023
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Explore the markets with our free course
Discover the range of markets and learn how they work - with IG Academy's online course.
Try IG Academy
You might be interested in…
How much does trading cost?
Find out about IG
Plan your trading
Find out what charges your trades could incur with our transparent fee structure.
Discover why so many clients choose us, and what makes us a world-leading provider of CFDs.
Stay on top of upcoming market-moving events with our customisable economic calendar.
Markets
Share CFDs
Forex
Indices
Commodities
Other markets
Trading platforms
Web platform
Trading apps
TradingView
MetaTrader 4
ProRealTime
Compare features
Demo
Learn to trade
News and trade ideas
Trading strategy
About
Charges and margins
Premium services
Refer a friend
Marketing partnerships
Corporate accounts
Contact us
Web chat:
Click here
WhatsApp:
Click here
to chat to us on our official Whatsapp channel
IG
|
Terms and agreements
|
Privacy
|
How to fund
|
Vulnerability
|
Cookies
|
About IG
Follow us online:
^IG International Limited is part of the IG Group and its ultimate parent company is IG Group Holdings Plc. IG Group established in London in 1974, and is a constituent of the FTSE 250 index.
The risks of loss from investing in CFDs can be substantial and the value of your investments may fluctuate. 71% of retail client accounts lose money when trading CFDs, with this investment provider. CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money rapidly due to leverage. You should consider whether you understand how this product works, and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.
CFD Accounts provided by IG International Limited. IG International Limited is licensed to conduct investment business and digital asset business by the Bermuda Monetary Authority.
IG provides an execution-only service. The information in this site does not contain (and should not be construed as containing) investment advice or an investment recommendation, or an offer of or solicitation for transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result.
The information on this site is not directed at residents of the United States and is not intended for distribution to, or use by, any person in any country or jurisdiction where such distribution or use would be contrary to local law or regulation.
IG International Limited is part of the IG Group and its ultimate parent company is IG Group Holdings Plc. IG International Limited receives services from other members of the IG Group including IG Markets Limited.
© 2003-2026
Careers
|
IG Group
